Hi everybody. How's everyone doing?
That isn't even moderate enthusiasm.
Come on. How's everyone doing?
>> All right. It's like a B minus. Um, my
name is Aiden Flaxclark. I'm the
director of life from NYPL and I am
thrilled even with your B minus
enthusiasm. I'm thrilled you're all
here. We're going to get to B+ by the
end of the night, right?
See, [cheering] we're already there. Um
and if you're watching online, thank you
as well for being with us. Um Sedartha
Mukerji is here tonight. Uh he has just
published an updated edition of his
seinal Pulitzer Prizewinning book, The
Emperor of All Maladies. Uh the book is
described as a humane biography of
cancer from its first documented
appearances uh thousands of years ago
through the epic race today to cure,
control and conquer it. Uh and in
addition to winning the Pulitzer, the
book among many accolades was named in
New York Times top 100 book of the
century. Uh and it also landed on the
Time magazine all time 100. Uh so it's
like pretty good.
Um, and believe it or not, 15 years ago,
two days after the book was published,
he was here in this library to talk
about it. Um, so we just couldn't be
more honored that he's back again 15
years later, um, to talk about this new
edition, which has been updated with
four new chapters that illuminate new
developments in cancer detection,
prevention, treatment, and
understanding. Um, and hopefully you saw
it's available for sale over here, and
everyone has already purchased many
copies. Yes.
All right. I don't believe you, but
you're going to have more time at the
end of the talk. So, uh, if you didn't
get it on the way in, you'll have a
chance to buy it on the way out. Uh, and
he will be signing copies of the book
over here afterward as well. Um,
Sedartha will be speaking with Duv
Koular. Drew is an associate professor
of health policy and economics at Wild
Cornell Medical College. Uh, he is also
a writer for the New Yorker. Uh, his
full bio along with Sedartha is
available in your printed program. uh or
if you're watching online, it's on the
event listing or the YouTube page. Um
you received note cards when you came
in. These are for asking questions at
the end of the talk. Uh my colleagues
will come by during the conversation and
pick up your note cards. Uh please uh
phrase your questions in the form of uh
questions. We really appreciate that. Uh
and if you're watching online, uh you
can put your question in the chat and
we'll be glad to get it there as well.
Live from NYPL is made possible by the
continuing generosity of Celeste Bartos,
Manaz Espahani Bartos, and Adam Bartos,
and much more importantly by all of you
here and all of you online. So, thank
you very much for being here. Thank you
for your support. And let's please give
it up for Duv Koular and Sedartha
Mukerj.
All right.
Well, um, I was in medical school when
The Emperor of All Melades came out, and
I don't think it's an exaggeration to
say that the book changed my life. It is
a book that is uh staggering in its
scope and ambition. And as a medical
student, I thought, wow, it's possible
uh for a book to be like that. it's
possible for a career to be like that.
That you could be a doctor who sees
patients and a writer who communicates
to the public uh with such nuance and
narrative and beauty. So, I want to just
start by saying this is a real treat.
Thank you uh for coming to do this with
me.
Um maybe we can start at the beginning
uh at the beginning of the new uh
version and just I'll have you read uh a
little bit of the opening to the 15th
anniversary edition.
>> Great. Well, thank you for having me uh
Duv. Um
and we can begin at the beginning as it
were. um
uh it begins
with what with what is now called part
seven. Now the amazing thing about it is
that in adding so many more chapters
maybe paper has become thinner
because I had imagined that by this time
that having added four or five major new
chapters that this book would become
like a you know something that you could
kill someone with
but it isn't. So, I think the uh the
Chinese are doing something right.
I'm not supposed to say that. Um
anyway, um it's called The Emperor's New
Journey, 2010 to 20125 and beyond.
And it begins with um a poem which I
think is very an important poem which
sort of in some ways colors the whole
book. Um, this is of course from Emily
Dickinson. I measure every grief I meet
with narrow probing eyes. I wonder if it
weighs like mine or has an easier size.
I wonder if they bore it long or did it
just begin? I could not tell the date of
mine. It feels so old a pain.
Um,
and so this is the introduction to the
new edition and I I suppose it answers
the question which is the first question
um which is why write a book again
uh uh once it's been written um and
again to quote um I wonder if they bore
it long or did it just begin. Um, so
this is called The Emperor's New
Journey. That's the seventh part and
therefore the introduction to the new
book. Um, in the summer of 2008,
I walked into the office of a New York
editor with a large brown paper bag. Um,
that's Dan Graham. Say hello, Dan.
[laughter]
>> In it were 600 pages of my book, The
Emperor of All Malades.
My mother had looked at the brick thick
blackbound pages as I left my house and
called it the telephone directory of
hell.
I sat in the editor's waiting room high
above 6th Avenue looking outside. It was
one of those magical New York afternoons
when the balmyiness of the air becomes
intoxicating and crowds had gathered on
the streets.
But I was a trainee in oncology in
Boston and all I could see was a
landscape of future grief and anxiety.
The woman laughing breezily by the
bakery might be diagnosed with cancer.
Ovarian question mark breast question
mark. In a few years I imagined the man
smoking a cigarette with evident
pleasure by the fountain in a hospital
gown as he went for a lung CT scan. The
lenses with which I saw the world had
forever been changed.
In the 15 years since the publication of
the emperor of all malades, the
collective lenses through which we see
cancer have also forever been changed.
New horizons have emerged in the early
detection of cancer. While innovations
and treatment built on extraordinary
work in immunology and cell therapy have
widened the tantalizing world of
personalized medicine. Some cancers
considered untreatable only a decade ago
have been eradicated in individual
patients. And yet the disease continues
to surprise and frustrate us.
There is of course no one cancer and
there will be no one cure. And with each
apparent step forward, the vast tangle
of cancer's complexity comes more
vividly into view. The complete
eradication of cancer through prevention
remains a fantasy. We hunt for new
classes of carcinogens. Yet the
definition of carcinogens does not on
its own explain why a tumor will develop
in one person and not another.
Technologies purporting the early
detection of cancer sprout daily but are
yet to demonstrate that patients
diagnosed with these technologies will
have improved outcomes. And even with
new therapies, many patients with cancer
remain and become resistant to
treatment. Meanwhile, the cost of cancer
treatment skyrockets,
presenting an insurmountable barrier to
the equitable distribution of medical
care. Through all this, cancer remains a
meme for everything that is malignant in
our society and culture.
When I begin when I began writing the
emperor malades, I had in mind a kind of
journal that will allow me to make sense
of the world of cancer. The world of
cancer that I had experienced as a young
physician in medical oncology. As I
wrote, the book became something far
greater than I first imagined.
It became a biography that aimed to
illuminate humanity's engagement with
this terrifying and beguiling ailment. I
would tell the story through the
intersection of lives and ideas,
scientific theory and medical practice,
culture and belief, traced through the
sweep of history, as well as within the
intimacy of a single patient's diagnosis
and treatment.
And so, in a sense, the chapters that
follow an entirely new in a sense, the
chapters that follow constitute an
entirely new emperor. In a decade and a
half, there's been so much more learning
that I realized that only a new book
could capture the horizons ahead. The
new chapters are organized simply along
with three pillars of our strategy
against cancer, prevention, screening,
and treatment, capped with a chapter on
a new vision for the future.
New vistas have opened yet more new
vistas for exploration science and
medicine and for the evolving cultural
metaphors that cancer still evokes.
Prevention, cancer, treatment and the
future. I welcome you to a new book.
[applause]
Thank you for that. Um so I want to
start by rewinding back even further uh
than the start of the new book which is
um how did the idea first come to you?
You know when did it first come to you?
Why did it come to you? Why frame
this book as a biography? You know not
as a scientist not a biography of a
place but but of a disease. Um take us
back to I don't know 2005 2008 whenever
you started thinking about this book.
Well, um the new book began because no
such book existed. Um and it was really
my own attempt to try to understand the
disease. Um the book be begins with a
very simple um anecdote of a patient who
comes to me and says why am I being
treated this way in this manner um
through this protocol um and I began to
realize that this is not a question of
one person this is a a very universal
question a question that we're all
trying to understand why how did we get
here how did cancer become what it is
today how did and what will happen in
the future
And the idea of writing um
writing the book began that way. And and
then I I I titled my books very late in
the process of titling books. When I
looked back and started reading what was
then a journal, I I realized that that
there was a biographical quality to it.
Um, now people often say, well, you
know, aren't you making, you know, isn't
this an anthropomorphic
variant of of
but but literary biographies have
existed of characters that are much more
fictional than um than than than the
role cancer occupies in our lives. And
therefore, this is how this is how the
book began. The book began because I was
interested in very fundamental
questions. Where are we going? How do we
get here? What happens next? Um, but I
was also interested in the cultural
metaphors. Um, you know, Sag's illness
as Metaphor was a very influential book
for me. Um, and plays a very large role
in the in the first book. Um and you
know the the writing of um uh Oliver
Saxs, the writing of Atawande
um and so many others had played a very
influential role in my life. And yet I I
felt as if I was trying to write
something that was um
a
something that was more more uh
simultaneously more intimate but had the
sweep of history in it. Um I was not
trying to write an Oliver Saxian case
history. I was not trying to write uh
there were so many knots. I was not
trying to write a a Santagian
um credorf about what illness meant. I I
was trying to write none of them but all
of them. Um and I was trying to focus on
one disease, the one that is
in some ways defines contemporary life.
And so that's how the book came about.
>> Were you surprised by the tremendous
>> Sorry, go ahead.
>> reception of that the book received. I
mean, a lot of doctors write books. Not
all of them win the Pulitzer Prize and
become a Ken Burns documentary. Um, I
read somewhere that you called your
parents and told them you won the
Pulitzer and they said, "Oh, cool.
What's that?" Um, and so, uh, how did
your life change after, uh, the book
received the type of reception that it
did?
>> Well, my life changed forever. I mean,
you know, once uh you once you get uh
once you if you're fortunate to get
critical acclaim of this and the book
became a kind of again like cancer, a
kind of meme that I hadn't expected.
um
you know routinely um
I see variations of words and phrases
from the book lifted appropriately
acknowledged lifted and so my life
changed forever. Um I became in some
ways there there were things about it
that that I didn't want to become. I
didn't want to become sort of the the
cancer expert of the world. Um, I I
wanted the I wanted to retain the
curiosity and the intimacy um that it
means to be a physician and a a a
patient. Um,
>> but did you always see yourself as um
kind of a literary doctor? like would
this have been your path regardless of
the success of the book or would you
have gone in a different direction
become more of a just publishing in
academic journals let's say or I know
you're now an entrepreneur as well but
I'm just trying to get a sense of um
what does Sid Mukerji look like today if
not for the success of this book
>> well obviously a very different I look
like a different person I am a different
person my my public life is different my
you know the the the way I intercept the
world is different. So, so yes, it's a
you know, the book swerved my life uh in
a way a kind of a river in spate swerves
your life. Um, and the book swerved my
life in in in of course in some very
positive ways, but also as I said some
some ways that were unexpected and and
and not even desirable. Um uh the
just to give you one example um my
ultimately I had to hide my email
because my inbox even today
>> I'm sorry about that. I there was only
25 emails I sent you that day.
[laughter]
>> But but uh but but but it's not the
complimentary email. the the the ones
that are that bring real grief are the
ones that are uh my son has medular
blastto um I know you never seen me in
my life I know you don't you know don't
know know my son but if you knew him if
you knew Joe um he's 11 months old um
he's a playful character he um loves um
rhymes um can you please up. Um, and
those break your heart because you can't
you cannot for so many reasons you
cannot um, but they break your heart in
so many different ways because this was
not the person I wanted to become. I
didn't want to become the, you know, the
the the person who can't write back
emails because they break your heart.
Um, and that's what I became. Um uh
there is a um there is a uh um as you
know there's a the beautiful book by um
John Green uh the fault in our stars um
has a character in it uh who writes a
book called the imperial malady um I I'm
acknowledged in the book so it's fine uh
um but that character
has they the the woman the the young
protagonist the young woman goes with
cancer goes to meet this guy who lives
in some Holland or someplace I don't
remember but um and he turns out to be
sort of he turns out to have lost heart
um and in some ways I I I I still wonder
to what extent this book sort of like a
river in full spate just deviated my
life out of what would have been I would
have imagined
a a life of a of of a thoughtful,
compassionate doctor who is able to
answer his emails every day.
>> Yeah. Um so part of the answer to this
question is is contained in the book. So
you'll have to buy it uh if you want the
full answer, but let me just um preview
some of it. So in the last 15 years
since the first edition came out, what
has surprised you most about the changes
in oncology or or healthcare more
generally like what are the things that
you would not have predicted in 2010
2011 and what are the things that you
maybe did predict?
>> Well the the the
I think the most illuminating chapters
well all the three chapters contain
dramatic new information. Um but if I
was just if I was strugg I'll just give
you sort of headliners uh from all the
the the the four chapters
in cancer prevention in in the question
patients or patients families loved ones
are asking themselves is why did I get
cancer? Um, and that question is a
question that people ask themselves who
have not exposed themselves to what we
know as classical cancercausing agents,
carcinogens. They're not smokers.
They've, you know, had drunk their goji
berry juice for a full decade um, and
gone to every yoga retreat that they
could have gone to. they've been good
cancer doobies. Um, and yet here they
are in a blue hospital gown getting a
cat scan for lung cancer. Um, and so the
question which was an embarrassing
question for the community for our
community of physicians was what are we
missing? Are we missing something that
is in the universe of carcinogen? Is
there dark matter in carcinogenesis that
we're missing? And this became a and
this became a progressively embarrassing
question. What is not what I don't write
about in the book but which is real is
that um if you really think about it
um we had not
found a preventable carcinogen
of
a preventable chemical carcinogen of
great impact on human communities since
the 1970s
and that was cigarette smoke. Um, you
know, you could say obesity is maybe one
big example, but this was in some ways
you could say this is a this is a
bizarre situation. You know, we're
spending hundreds of millions of dollars
and certainly we found we found many new
carcinogens, but none which had the kind
of public health impact. Um, so the
headline of the first chapter is we are
actually now finding new ones, but
they're but they're a form of carcinogen
that we had never expected to find. They
are they are truly the dark matter of
carcinogenesis. Um, I'll leave you with
that uh thought. The second one, so the
second area we talked about is the
second chapter is on early detection and
screening. And even today there was an
article in the times about early
detection and screening and how cancer
rates are going up and some say they're
going down some you know there's and the
answer is that there is a fundamental
inbuilt mathematical reason that early
detection and screening has not worked
the way we had intended to work. Um and
to find out you'll have to read the
second chapter. Um the third has to do
with treatment. Um the big missing piece
there was um the immune system and the
role of immunology and inflammation in
cancer. Um and that leads onto the
fourth which is a new direction in which
we can integrate all of this to find a
new pathway forward.
So let me push you a little bit. I was
um when I was reading the the the end of
the book, I was delighted to see my name
uh in the book and that was a real
thrill for me. And then I realized it
was mostly just about my prostate and
that was less um that was less exciting.
Um so the story is that I had written an
article about getting a full body MRI
which are now being kind of aggressively
marketed and um and the MRI picked up a
small lesion in my prostate. These are
graded on a scale from one to five. It
was three of course. So they have no
idea what it was. Um and it led to
additional testing and followup MRIs and
so on. Um so I guess my my reading
reading the the chapter on screening you
could come away with it with the
impression that very little works in
cancer screening uh even the traditional
things that we think might work like
colonoscopies and mammogs and now there
are these new modalities like full body
MRIs or liquid biopsies. So maybe just
spend a moment talking about the
difficulty of cancer screening, why it
is the case that even today medicine has
so little to offer um people who want to
be proactive about getting screened and
what you make of these newer mo
modalities that are now on the horizon.
>> Yeah. So the problem with cancer
screening is
a is a mathematical problem. It is not a
cancer problem. It is not a biological
problem. It's a mathematical problem.
And it's a very it's a simple
mathematical problem. I describe it in
the book. Uh there are many mathematical
problems but there's one fundamental one
and the one fundamental one is um this
is a thought exercise that I'll throw
out to you. Um imagine and this is in
the book. So um you'll read about it in
the book but imagine they're twins in
the book I call them hope and prudence
um who get diagnosed with or who don't
get diagnosed who get breast cancer at
the same moment of time um at the same
second as the clock ticks. Um, one of
them, Hope, um, decides that she is
going to be very proactive about her
health, goes through her scans and, um,
a mammogram, finds that she has breast
cancer and they, you know, surgeons
operate on it, they give her
chemotherapy, etc., etc., etc., and she
dies um, uh, 5 years later after her
cancer has been detected.
Uh, Prudence says, you know, I'm not
doing any of this. I'm going to go to
Mexico, um, have wheatgrass juice and
I'm not participating in all of this
nonsense scanning, etc., etc. And, um,
she is not diagnosed until her breast
cancer becomes either visible or she
starts having symptoms. Um, and then
that's much later. um and she gets
diagnosed at that point of time and then
hope and prudence are uh put into the
same hospital bed and they unfortunately
die in the same moment of time as the
clock ticks. So now ask yourself the
question um you use the word survival
comes up right. So how many years does
did Hope survive and the answer is well
she survived 5 years she had breast
cancer and then she was detected treated
etc etc. She survives 5 years. How many
years did prudent survive? She survives
one year because she um gets detected at
the one year and then she dies. But of
course that couldn't be true because
both of them acquired their breast
cancer at the same moment moment of time
and they died at the same moment of
time. So Hope's screening did nothing to
her really. They both both of them had
the exact same moment of death. So the
only way that you can really judge a
screening test cancer screening test is
by using mortality
uh not survival. Survival is easy to
judge because you can put people on a
trial and you can have two control
groups and have one group saying, you
know, they went through the test and
they survived five years. The other one
didn't go through the test and survived
one year, so therefore the test works.
>> Yeah. So, I guess that makes sense to
me, but what I don't understand, so
maybe the the mental model a lot of
people have is is incorrect and you can
correct it if that's the case. But
there's a few cells and they have some
mutations um and they develop into a
small tumor and it becomes a stage one
cancer and over time it gets bigger and
it spreads to lymph nodes and it spreads
distantly and we call that stage two to
three, four, right? Um, and the idea is
that if you were to screen, you could
catch it at stage one or stage two and
you could intervene such that hope would
actually have lived longer than prudence
in this um example. And why is that so
hard? Why can't we catch it?
>> And that's that's the problem that there
there's some there there's a I I'll
offer some solutions as well. This is
not as as dire as you're making it out
as one can make it out to be. the the
mistake people make and actually it's
interesting it's a mistake that Halstead
made is this this idea that you just
said so there's a stage one cancer it
then spreads to the lymph nodes it then
moves into the next organ and then moves
that is not the behav that is not the
biology of cancer the biology of cancer
is that some stage one tumors begin and
they immediately metastasize or they
immediately have thrown out metastasis
called this the centrifugal theory as
you remember and this is the basis for
years and years of radical surgery. He
thought the more you cut away you'll cut
away you know this centrifugally
spreading like an ink blot spreading
thing you cut away the edges of the ink
blot you've gotten rid of the tumor
that's not how cancer works and it's
very hard to explain that to patients.
The biology of the tumor, its genetics,
its relationship with its micro, its
environment, its relationship with the
rest of your body is what determines
that the stage one tumor, the quote
unquote stage one tumor that you've
detected by early detection may have
already spread way outside a woman's uh
breast if you're doing mimography or
colon if you're doing colonoscopy. Now,
that's not completely true. there is a
there is a systematic spread but it it's
unpredictable. So therefore the number
of people where you can find that
systematic spread and control it it
really depends on the biology of the
tumor. It turns out that um uh cervical
cancer is a good example. Cervical
cancer tends to spread in the c
centrifugal way. That's why papsmears
work and that's why you can cut it out.
Colonoscopies work because you can
detect a precancerous lesion before it
has started spreading in into other
places. Other tumors you can't do that.
Um so you could say well oh my god why
why go through all this trouble? Well
there's a way out of this and it's an
important way and we're we're beginning
to explore it and I think we will
ultimately succeed and it was taught to
us by a 17th century mathematician. I
keep saying screening is a mathematical
problem and this was a a very unusual
17th century mathematician named Thomas
Ba and uh he wrote um three papers um of
which one paper may be the most
important paper in statistics and
probably and may even be the most
important paper in medicine and Baze
made a very simple argument. Baze said,
"Look, if you look for a needle in a hay
stack, uh, you'll find mostly hay and
not very many needles. If you put more
needles in the haystack, you'll start to
find needles. If you put even further
needles in the haystack, you'll
ultimately find needles more often."
Now,
>> I feel I could have come up with that.
[laughter]
>> I know, but it's it's astonishing that
you could well you one can come up with
that. he actually came up with some with
an actual theorem that has to do with
mathematics and he can you can predict
exactly what the number is. Um anyway
but the but the bottom line which is
interesting and very important is that
with the tools of risk assessment
um es and especially with with genetics
you can do a basian trial and a basian
trial is very different from a normal
trial. A basian trial is you you move
the prior probability of someone being
detected and having a true positive
cancer. A cancer that's lethal can be uh
can should be caught early. You move it
now towards a a much more positive
direction. Positive in the sense that
you you you find more needles rather
than more a um and you can now do that
with breast cancer. So that's why we
screen people with BA 1 mutations and we
find cancers in those patients and I I
suspect that we we are the trials are
ongoing but I suspect those are those
are life-saving decisions. So screening
the entire population screening a in a
20-year-old or in Dufkuller a mass a a a
grade three or or scale three detected
uh blip in an MRI is unlikely to be
cancer. um in a 70-year-old person whose
father died of prostate cancer um and
whose uncle also had another related
genetically related cancer the chances
that that same lesion is cancer is very
very likely to be true. So you have to
have a a basian approach and in fact I
would say the a basian approach is an
approach to life. It's it's a way of
living your life.
>> It's a way of assessing risk. Um
so when the 30th edition of Emperor is
released uh in 2040, what will we be
talking about? What will the next 15
years have brought us that uh when I get
to interview you again at that time? Um
we'll be we'll be uh going through then
how will cancer has changed?
>> Well, I think the I think the um I think
that the role of we we talked a little
bit about this the role of the in of We
we we for so long the theory of cancer
was dominated by cancer as a series of
malignant cells in a vacuum um that we
forgot that these cells actually
interact with their environment. They
live in an immune environment. They live
they bring out blood vessels from the
body. They live in an environment which
is crucial to their growth. And that's
why some tumors never grow while others
grow. So we'll be talking about a kind
of um a more holistic view of um of of
what cancer is as a disease the phys of
of that physiology and hopefully we'll
be talking about medicines that either
prevent treat or detect um based on that
that physiology. I think that's that's
what we'll be talking about and we'll be
talking about it I don't think we just
just metaphorically although the
metaphors are important uh we'll be
talking about it in terms of actual
medicines um some of which are already
existing in in the world uh that really
address this imunological aspect the
micro environmental aspect the metabolic
aspects of cancer things that we we knew
about we sort of ignored
tell us about um you know not a lot of
people who are doctors and academics and
successful writers uh end up becoming
entrepreneurs as well uh and starting
businesses. Um what is the work that
you're doing trying to find new
medicines using artificial intelligence
and how does that play into what we're
talking about now?
>> Well, so um as you know I've been very
involved in in
in finding new medicines. This is not my
first time that I've gone out of the
clinic into finding new medicines. Um we
were the first uh group actually ever to
use crisper for cancer cancer treatment.
Um and um so when AI came along um I
began to really think about dream about
or imagine um a mechanism of finding new
medicines for cancer using AI. I'm not
talking about AI to to look at human
data across populations stuff that maybe
people in your group do or maybe you do
yourself which is also a very good use
of the tool. Um what we what we do at
Manis uh which is a company I co-ounded
with Reed Hoffman and Udwell Singh. Um
what we try to do at Manis is to
reimagine the molecular world. Um so
just to take one step back um cancers
are driven of course by the the growth
of a cancer is driven by a mutated gene
which is driving the growth altering the
metabolism changing the way cancers uh
are uh behaving a cell is behaving. It's
no longer a normal cell. It's a
malignant cell.
Um what we do at Manis is I'll make you
close your eyes for a second and think
about these mutant genes these these
driving uh proliferators
and what we what we do at Manis
basically is we use AI um in many ways
but one way is to take this mutant
protein the one that's driving the
growth and uh break it up as it were
into its atomic components.
So now you've got this um you can
imagine this room as uh the mutant
protein the and we're trying to block
it. We're going to put some huge uh
balloon as it were to block this room
but it has to have a particular shape
and a particular size. And what we do is
we try to re-imagine this room at an
atomic scale ascribing every dot.
Imagine now this room pixelated and
devolved into its properties. So no
longer do we care about whether there is
a uh an arch there or not, but rather we
care about the properties of that arch
and we distill we we we make the machine
learn the properties so that it can then
find mechanisms to find new medicines.
Um so we're using AI in a very
particular way. We call it, you know,
we've had v various names for it, but
it's uh the the the way I like to
describe it is it's a molecular oracle.
We we tried we we were we're trying to
create a molecular oracle and then ask
the molecular oracle questions that you
would ask an oracle, which is now that
you've distilled the properties and
learned the properties. That's what the
AI piece is. you've learned the
properties of something. Tell me
in an eracular way, tell me that uh how
you're going to create a medicine
against it. And the medicines that we're
hoping to get, we're actually now
finding whether they work or not in
humans is a long ways away. But the the
kinds of chemicals that we're hoping to
find are chemical is chemical matter
that's never been discovered before. is
new chemical matter because we're the
old chemical matter that we've
discovered against cancer, you know,
works in small instances but doesn't
work often enough.
>> So, someone who's been working um to
develop new medicines before the advent
of these new AI tools, how big of a step
change advance is it? I mean should we
expect in 5 10 15 years that we have
many many more uh oncology uh onc uh
oncology drugs or uh is it the case that
it's not quite like that that you still
have these bottlenecks of human biology
being complex and clinical trials and
and so on. So um you know how do you how
do you square that with uh what we've
experienced in the past to the future?
Well, so I my general impression is that
um that AI will be an enormous
accelerant. Um it has generally been
again remember we're not creating chat
bots. Um we're working in a different
model of AI. We're working with a
foundation model of AI. We're creating
an oracle. Um now oracles in AI like all
oracles depend on data. Um you have to
you have to train them. they have to
learn. Um and one of the bottlenecks is
is data um in this space. Now thankfully
about 15 to 20 years ago um a group of
scientists u led by a woman in in in
England um made it compulsory that if
you solve the structure of a protein if
you figured out as I said in some ways
again to use this analogy the structure
of this room you you your paper could
only be published if you deposited that
structure in a public database. Uh and
think about think about that just that
advance. Um and so uh and all the
journals agreed that that would be the
case. So there is a massive public
database
uh where uh enormous amounts of protein
structure are is stored. Um and so what
we do is our one of our jobs is to train
the Oracle to learn from that database.
Um and the real question is is there
enough even with that massive public
database is there enough data? I suspect
there is uh but I can't tell for sure.
Um we we'll know soon actually. We'll
know soon at least for this atomic
model. We'll know whether this is going
to be work a work in progress or not.
So, I know you're not training chatbots,
you're training an oracle, but um how
far are we from a chatbot writing the
emperor of all maladies.
>> Oh, nice.
>> Like, is that conceivable in five or 10
years the job of uh you know, fantastic
non-fiction writers actually chatbots
could do that uh reasonably well.
>> So, so the other day I did an experiment
in which I took um I I said uh write
about something or the other. I don't
remember what I was saying in the style
of Sarata Mukhiji. Um, and I was
horrified
>> because it was so good or so bad.
>> It was terrible. It was terrible. I was
like, "Oh my god, if I if I ever even
come close to writing like this, I mean,
I must sound like some crazy person on
the on the page." Um, so, uh, I I think
I'm safe for now. Um, but I'm not sure.
Maybe maybe they'll figure out some
clever algorithm. But but it was so
horrifyingly bad that I felt I felt kind
of simultaneously relieved and and uh
and a little embarrassed.
>> Sid said GPT. Um uh I think I have one
more question. I think we are going to
move on to audience questions. So if you
if you have any and you want to uh jot
them down, we're
>> going to read uh we're going to read the
last few
>> read one more um at the end of the the
book here.
Um
so this is u the
last two pages of the book. Um I read
the first two pages of the new book and
then now the last two pages.
So the first book me many of you
remember ended with uh my patient
Germaine.
I think of my patient Germaine often. I
remember her sitting with such perfect
poise on the evening before she died. I
recall her grace and dignity and the
enormity of her courage. I think of her
will and wit and imagination.
And I also think of her sly humor.
I know you're writing a journal about
your fellowship. I want to say good
luck, she told me. And then she winked.
This voluminous book was once no more
than an untidy sheath of notes that I
carried. and she had once seen the
papers fall out of my backpack.
Her voice was soft and flecked with
infinite kindness, even as she strained
to breathe.
I felt moved to tears.
Here was a woman submerged in pain and
fear, drenched in grief, and yet she had
found time to think about the
scribblings of a lowly fellow in scrubs,
scre leaning over her with a
stethoscope.
A group of nurses entered the room to
wheel the bed next to her away. The bed
was folded and moved to the corridor
outside. The patient had passed.
"Whatever you write," she said. "Make me
look fabulous."
"Fabulous? Okay, I don't have much
time."
There was momentary silence in the room,
then the soft screech of a bed being
wheeled away.
What is time? A student of a Zen monk
asked his master month after month.
There was no reply, just silence. A few
months later, the monk replied
irritably, "Time is a head of cabbage."
There are many variations of this coan.
But the point perhaps is that time is
inscrutable. It lies beyond human
comprehension, and asking questions
about time doesn't make it more
understandable. The question is absurd,
and so is its answer. The time I spent
with Germaine was one evening. Or was it
a few months?
Or is it a lifetime?
Time was a hospital bed that would be
folded and stowed away in some corner.
Perhaps it was an unforgettable evening
in a room spent talking about a farm in
her hometown in Alabama. Or perhaps a
lifetime thinking about a patient that I
still cannot forget with a shape shift
shifting inscrable illness that I'm
still trying to understand.
Time is a head of cabbage.
I've spent my life in search of
comprehension, but it still eludes me.
But at least in that searching, I
discovered a cosmos of realities.
A few months after Emperor was
published, I received a handwritten
letter. It was from Germaine's brother.
Even though I had changed her name and
disguised her identity, he had
recognized her in my book. She would
have loved, admired, and understood your
book, he wrote.
understood. A strange word, a word that
signals a desire to know not just about
patients, scientists, and doctors, but
about history, about the birth and
growth and future of a discipline. That
evening, somehow Germaine had intuited
that Emperor would be much more than a
personal journal. She understood what I
wanted to understand.
This was the best praise I've ever
received about this book.
Thank you.
Now you know why AI can't emulate said
Mukerji. Um we have a couple questions
here and I'm guessing that people are
more accustomed to typing than writing
lawn now because it's very difficult to
uh parse this. But can you talk about
how you write? What is your daily
process and what tools do you use?
>> Uh, so I write in a very bizarre way.
Um, it's been written about humorously.
I write in bed um almost exclusively.
Um, I find it very comforting and um
when I had a new office um I put a bed
in my office. I suspect that that would
not be loud today. But uh
um but then I quickly removed it. Um but
um what but how do I write? I write in
small bursts. Um I write when I have a
thought. Um you know I was just reading
this piece on on on Oliver Sachs today
at in the New Yorker, a lovely piece. Um
and he wrote compulsively. Um and he
wrote, he kept journals after journals
and he wrote and he wrote and he would
sit in a taxi and write etc etc. Um I
write anticompulsively.
Um, and that means that I think about
what I'm going to write, but I don't put
a single word down and I think for a
long time and I keep thinking and then
when I'm in
hopefully in bed um I can write a full
chapter um in one go. Um, and I write
from beginning to end. I edit or nan
really helps me edit later, but I can I
really write the I write from the first
word to the last word because in some
ways I've been thinking about the
process on the on the way.
>> What concerns you most about our current
department of health and human services?
>> Where does one start? Um,
look, you know, uh,
uh, the
let me talk a little bit about the
rhetoric of anti-science, which is
probably what's driving I don't have a
personal animosity against any
particular person in the Department of
Health and Human Services, except that
there's one person I'd love to uh,
vaccinate. Um
uh but that said um
uh I think that um you know I think that
that that the concerns are very broad.
The concerns are that um since the 1950s
um the United States has led the world
in innovation and this is innovation in
in in every way. Cultural innovation,
scientific innovation, technological
innovation. This is the one thing we're
actually good at. We're terrible at many
things, but this is the one thing that
has always been the centerpiece of of
what what h how we have come to change
the world. Um, and I think that the um
anti-science rhetoric is the first and
the anti-culture rhetoric, the
anti-reading rhetoric and the fake news
rhetoric is one way that we will destroy
this amazing amazing lead. So I I I you
know we can talk about particulars and
why the department of why the HHS has so
many problems but I I I I want to talk
about the generalities that we're
destroying
we're we're we're actively seeing the
dismantling of a particular kind of
civilization and the fact that we're
actively watching it and doing nothing
about it should be deeply embarrassing
to us. Does it change the way you think
about communicating, you know, in an
anti- elite, anti-expertise,
anti-science type of environment when so
many people are skeptical and
distrustful of institutions and
academics and doctors and so on? How
should people in positions of influence
and power communicate about these
issues?
Well, I mean, one thing I think to some
extent I think doctors and physicians
and scientists painted themselves into a
corner um by by becoming experts without
humility. Um
the
it it's very easy to dismantle an expert
because the an expert belongs to a class
of the elite and this is a very anti-
even though it's we're being governed by
the elite ironically this is a very
anti- elitist moment. Um so I think
scientists, physicians and in their
rhetoric, in the use of language, in the
use of power um really painted ourselves
into a corner because we uh we assumed
the role of um the the language of the
elite without assuming the humility that
comes with being uh that elite. Um I
mean you don't need me to tell you that
we don't know half a thing about cancer
otherwise we'd be treating and curing it
with much much more um vigor than than
we are today. So I I think the way the
the the answer to your question is to
for ourselves to go back and describe
the process by which we come to
understanding which is a messy complex
um often a process which does not
involve um the kind of scientific
heroism which is so easy to disband. You
know, the the the the scientific hero
begs the scientific anti-hero. The
pro-vcinator begs the antivaccinator
because the antivaccinator says, "Well,
wait a second. How did you get to be how
did you get to be the the boss of me?"
Um so the answer to the question of how
we communicate during this time is to
climb down from the various towers that
we occupy and speak to people in the
language that we ourselves speak with
each other which is a language that
involves not knowing, language that
involves humility but also language that
involves an attempt to understand.
um you know we we actually to be honest
we actually don't know um all the myriad
although it was an incredible savior of
human lives we don't know all the myriad
effects that the covid vaccine has had
on human beings admit it it's okay the
world will not you know things will not
civilization will not crumble if you or
I as physicians say that we saved
millions of lives and yet we don't know
some fundamental things about immunology
in in vaccination. It's okay. Um and
it's precisely this kind of oppositional
um technocratic
um uh befuddling way of speaking and the
lack of communication that's led to this
moment and we we have to undo it.
>> Cancer ever be fully cured or just
managed? Is curing it a pipe dream? It
depends on the kind of cancer. I think
we're curing lots. Um and we are going
to cure more. Um
um we are curing childhood leukemias at
80% 90% of cases of childhood leukemias
have long-term cures, terrible side
effects. We're trying to now work
backwards to diminish those side
effects.
um a woman with breast cancer uh living
in 2025
has a completely different outlook on
her life than a woman with breast cancer
in 2015 or even in 1915. Um you know
massive changes. A woman with or a man
with pancreatic or gallbladder cancer
that spread has no change in their life
expectancy basically give or take since
uh you know since dozens of years. So um
I think you know I think we will we will
find a way through find a pathway
through and every breakthrough will be a
a great moment for for us as scientists
as human beings and as patients but um
it's very hard to answer can we ever
cure it. Will we ever you know it's not
going away that's for sure. We know that
random stochastic genetic accidents
cause cancer just as carcinogens cause
cancer. We know exactly how they cause
cancer. they cause mutations and those
happen when cells divide they when they
make copies of themselves you can get a
random genetic accident and that is the
the genetic accident that leads to
cancer among you know many other things
so so I think we'll never the word
cancer is not going to be removed from
our society um uh in a way that you know
I don't know certain certain other
diseases have been really in in a way
that smallox uh you know has has really
vastly not completely but vastly
disappeared from our from our society.
So cancer will always be with us. Its
metaphors will be with us. Its memes
will be with us but I think we'll change
the way we think about it.
>> We have a couple questions from um young
people in the audience it looks like and
um I guess putting them together. What
advice do you have for people who are at
the start of their careers who want to
do something in medicine or science or
journalism or who just want to nudge the
world in a better direction?
>> Well, the the um
uh uh I have a memory of a young
journalist who and doctor who came to my
office 10 years ago, 15 years ago uh and
that was Duv um and uh I don't remember
I
Generally speaking, I give terrible
advice. So, whatever I'm going to say,
you should probably immediately discount
it. Um, but um the the general ideas,
the general thing that I say to people
is to have at least one big idea. Um,
and then once you know you have that big
idea, really follow it. Um, it sounds
like vague advice and it probably
probably is. I'm not going to give you a
a stepby-step uh you know ascendancy
into becoming a writer for the New
Yorker, but uh but nonetheless, I I I do
think it's important to have one big
idea and to execute it um and and and
really to learn how to execute it to to
to really put yourself um to learn how
to execute it. Um I'll give you a quick
anecdote that I think is kind of uh uh
which I found very moving. I went to a
conference um in um a medical conference
um and you know medical conferences have
scientists and they have physicians um
and physician scientists etc. And I went
to a dinner and there was someone's
someone had passed away and there was a
memorial and um the person stood up and
said you know so and so forth whoever it
was never made a major scientific
discovery
but he learned how to cure leukem
childhood leukemia and I thought to
myself that's a very beautiful thought
he never made a big scientific discovery
but he maybe he learned how to speak to
patients and their families he learned
how to bring that child back year after
year, month after month to be
re-examined. He learned how to
administer chemotherapy in a way that
the child would be able to take it. He
maybe learned how to tell a story. Maybe
he learned puppetry. I mean, I don't
know, but he learned something. He had
one big idea and he learned something.
So, I don't think there's a, you know,
there's I I don't think there's a
there's a for [snorts] formulaic way of
stating it, but to learn how to do
something is very beautiful and very
important. and um and now we have
machines to compete with, so we'd better
do it quickly.
>> Well, Sid, thank you for this
conversation. Thank you for this book,
and thank you all for coming this
evening.
>> Thank you.